---
layout: post
title:  "Week 5: PCB Design"
image: week5/board-traces.png
permalink: /week5/
---

This week's assignment is to learn how to design and fabricate a PCB
from start to finish using Eagle and the skills we learned a couple of
weeks ago.

The interesting thing I noted right off the bat is that Eagle produces
XML files in a plain text format. This means that electronic circuits
can be shared in an open source way, and in fact Sparkfun is a company
that [shares a lot of their software via
GitHub](https://learn.sparkfun.com/tutorials/using-github-to-share-with-sparkfun). I
share code via GitHub all the time, but found it very cool to be able
to share hardware designs as well.

Eagle produces boards in two steps: first with a schematic, then with
routing. The schematic portion basically involves picking parts off of
a library and connecting them together. The library has basically done
most the work here: it has both the semantic and physical
representation of a part.

Our task this week is to edit the `echo hello-world` board with a
button and an LED. I noticed that there were 4 unused pins in the
default design, and that we had a tricolor LED. So I wired up a
schematic to control the 3 LED colors, and connect to the button.

A big timesaver is the use of named nets to connect pins in the
circuit. For example in the picture below all nets named `VCC` are
connected even though there is no wire between them. This makes it a
lot easier to avoid a mess of common bus connections.

![Schematic](eagle-schematic.png)

Note that each LED has its own resistor. This is necessary for a
number of reasons, including being able to control the brightness of
the LEDs independently, and compensating for their different levels of
brightness at the same level of current. In this case there is also
only one possible arrangement of the LEDs, because they have a common
anode: the microcontroller has to **sink current**.

**Always double check the parts in the library with the actual stocked
parts!** In my case, the LED did not have the same pins as the library
part, although the anode was in the same place. So the resistors for
the different colors will be soldered in different places.

After completing the schematic, we can move to the board phase. Eagle
basically dumps all of the components on the board in a big mess which
we need to move, rotate, and clean up. At this point the pins that
need to be connected are denoted with the gold *airwires*, which
disappear as actual traces are drawn.

![Starting Board](board-start.png)

Given that I had three extra LEDs and a button to route, I thought I
was going to be screwed for sure. But it turns out that every extra
resistor and component is an opportunity for wires to cross each
other, and it only took a minor amount of messing around to figure out
a configuration that worked. The routed schematic is shown in the
following figure:

![Routed Board](eagle-routed.png)

If you're using the `Cree PLCC4 3-in-1 SMD LED CLV1A-FKB`, note the
`R` and `B` pins are actually switched from the diagram above. It
doesn't really matter for the purposes of this schematic if you just
solder with the right resistors, but the "right" way to do things
would be to edit the library.

The final task with the board is to draw an outline which will
dimension its size. In Eagle, this simply means drawing a wire on the
`Dimension` layer (Layer 20). I drew a wire with a thickness of `0.032
in` (1/32), which is the size of the end mill that we use to cut out
the PCB. I also wrote my name on the board for easier recognition.

![Final Board](board.png)

The final step is to export the board at a high enough resolution (600
DPI seems to be sufficient) and create separate images for the traces
and interior so that they can be milled out on the MDX-20.

<img src="board-traces.png" alt="Board Traces" style="max-width: 48%">
<img src="board-interior.png" alt="Board Interior" style="max-width: 48%">

Using week 2 skills, this is turned into a physical object in pretty
short order. I know this is what this class is all about, but as
someone who usually works with software I'm continually surprised by
how I can turn things I've designed on my computer into real, physical
objects!

![Milled](milled.jpg)

Time for some more surface mount follies. While trying to use the
copper wick to remove excess solder, I appear to have jammed the
soldering iron into the LED and melted it pretty good. It has 4 pins;
how can I get it off?

![Melted LED](melted-led.jpg)

It's **heatgun desoldering** to the rescue! If you haven't learned of
this by now, it basically involves holding the board by the part to be
desoldered, and aiming a heatgun at it. This causes all of the joints
to melt simultaneously, and the board just falls away. Here's the
result:

![Heatgun Desoldering](heatgun-desolder.jpg)

I've finally managed to get all the parts on to the board without
incident. However, the FTDI connector is just hanging off the
board. This is probably why it's a good idea to check physical
components before doing the routing: it would be much more stable if
it was resting on the board. In my attempts to save space, I didn't
account for the physical layout of this part at all. Living and
learning - that's what this class is all about!

![Final Product](final.jpg)




