---
layout: post
title:  "Week 4: Foldable Table Tennis Training Net (Make Something Big)"
image: week4/folded.jpg
permalink: /week4/
---

The inspiration for this week's assignment is a training or catch net
for table tennis. These are useful for practicing serves, or for
[multiball
training](http://tabletennis.about.com/od/trainin1/a/multiball.htm)
when practicing certain strokes. The net conveniently catches balls in
a wide area and provides an easy way to retrieve them. [Our
club](http://www.bostonttc.us/) currently doesn't have one of these,
and so much training time is spent picking balls off the floor, as
they really go all over the place.

![Inspiration](inspiration.jpg)

The problem with the catch net is that is very large, designed to be
wide enough to fit around the table and tall enough to catch both high
and low balls. A table tennis table is 5 feet wide, and most good
catch nets are almost 6 feet high. So while it certainly fits the bill
for something that would be **big** to make, I also don't want it to
be too unwieldly.

As a result, I decided to explore designs for the net that would be
collapsible, or at least take up much less space when not in use. This
feature would also be desirable at my club, as there is not much space
to store a large structure. After turning over several ideas in my
head, I finally settled upon the following design, and made some hand
sketches to envision how it would work.

![Sketches](sketches.png)

At a high level, the net is a rectangular structure that folds up in
the two axes that take the most space, with arms collapsing in the
directions noted at the top left. Angle brackets will be used on
joints to restrict the degrees of freedom, so that the net doesn't
fall over when it is unfolded. Joints will use bolts with nylon lock
nuts, and large washers to prevent the wooden arms from rubbing
directly on each other. **Most importantly, the arms will need to be
carefully positioned in different planes so that they can move past
each other during the folding process.**

At this point, it became hard for me to mentally picture the different
pieces of the structure, so I got out the CAD tools. The first order
of business is a sketch of all the arms from the front perspective.

![Frame Sketch](frame-sketch.png)

The net has beams that connect the front and rear of the
structure. For the mating joints of these beams, I decided to use the
**blocks** feature of SolidWorks, which are basically sketches that
can be repeated in different places and are linked so that they can be
edited simultaneously. This shows two female joints, which are
designed to be press-fit (actually, more like mallet-fit).

![Blocks](blocks.png)

Because the arms rotate past each other in different planes, I laid
all of these out relative to the origin. There's no need to do this
for the back side as it is just a mirror of the front across a
particular plane.

![Planes](planes.png)

This shows one foot of the net, with a male and female press-fit
joint. The strange design is due to my plan to attach a caster wheel
on every foot, which has a threaded bolt end that needs to be screwed
in to the leg. The rectangular part will hold the leg together and
prevent the wood from splitting, so that the bolt will be nice and
snug.

![Foot](foot.png)

Here's the finished model - or at least as finished of a model I'll
need to make all of the parts. Note that all joints have two arms in
different parallel planes, and the beams joining the front and rear
frames are of different length. Several of these beams are not shown
in the model, but it contains one of each different length, which is
the important part.

![Finished Model](model.png)

Next up is a trip to Home Depot to get all of the hardware to assemble
this. The list includes:

 - One 36" aluminum angle bracket, to be cut into 10 pieces
 - 18 1-1/2" long 1/4-20 hex bolts
 - 4 2-1/2" long 1/4-20 hex bolts
 - 22 1/4-20 nylon lock nuts
 - One box of 100 1/4" fender washers
 - 4 non-marking swivel casters

![Hardware](hardware.jpg)

The angle brackets are screwed on to certain joints so that they can
lock into a straight position when the structure is fully
unfolded. The nylon lock nuts secure each bolt, with washers between
all pieces and at both ends. The nut is tightened just enough so that
the joint is pretty stiff but can still rotate. The washers along the
bolt prevent two pieces of wood from directly touching, possibly
seizing the joint and ripping off the surface of the OSB. Overall,
wood-on-zinc-washer seems to be a pretty good improvised [thrust
bearing](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thrust_bearing).

![Joint](joint.jpg)

On many sharp angles, I added dog-bone fillets using the VCarve
software, which cuts out the corner using the end mill and makes tight
mates possible. Note the final cut shape of the female joint compared
to the block drawing from SolidWorks.

![Dogbone Fillet](dogbone.jpg)

Here's a picture of the cutting process, which shows two interesting
things. First, I was careful to **design the toolpaths to cut out all
slots, holes, and pockets first before cutting the profile of each
part**. This ensures that the holes aren't cut in a random place from
the part moving around after losing its support. Second, the ShopBot
was using an up-cut end mill, which actually grabbed a piece as it was
finishing and ripped the end off. Luckily, OSB is forgiving to the
machine and disintegrates easily. Plywood might have broken the end
mill here.

![Cutting](cutting.jpg)

A note on end mills: down-cut end mills seem to be strictly superior
for this week's assignment, as they give a smoother top finish (and
also a decent bottom finish as long as the part is clamped down) while
up-cut end mills make very ragged edges that need to be filed down
later. Moreover, they also help to hold down the part while
cutting. The improved chip clearing of the up-cut doesn't seem to
matter much when there is a huge vacuum attached. However, all of our
down-cut end mills this week have been broken, including one by yours
truly when I tried to make an air cut at the wrong height (Sorry!)

The following is what happens when one doesn't cut all the way through
the part. I even restarted the job to cut deeper, but apparently not
enough. I had to spend a significant amount of time extracting these
parts and filing down rough edges afterward - much longer than the
cutting process itself took. On the upside, these turned out to be
unexpected tabs that helped to hold parts in place during cutting.

![Snafu](snafu.jpg)

I've started with the assembly of the bottom part of the net. Note the
press-fit mating joints, and the caster wheels screwed in to an
appropriate size hole and held in place by the rectangular feet.

![Assembly](assembly.jpg)

There are 36 different parts to this structure. That's a lot of
filing, cleanup, and assembly. I've been in the shop almost 12 hours
at this point, mostly because the machine was tied up all day.

![Lots of Parts](parts.jpg)

After much blood, sweat, and tears, success! At least the structure
can be assembled into its unfolded shape, so that it can serve its
intended purpose - at least, after I obtain a large net to attach to
the frame. There are a few extra undesirable degrees of freedom here,
because it's essentially a large parallelogram - but nothing that
can't be remedied with some cleverly placed staples and straps to
limit joint angles.

![Unfolded](unfolded.jpg)

The asymmetry between the two sides is intentional - one has beams
because it folds inside of the other arms, and the other doesn't
because it folds outside. I added as much structural support as
possible without compromising the ability to fold it up.

This is the real moment of truth - whether it can fold up in the two
axes as intended. After some additional grunting, I found that it
wasn't too hard to fold the net into its collapsed shape, which is
both narrower and shorter than the original structure. And it still
rolls around on all four wheels!

![Folded](folded.jpg)

I may have bitten off a bit more than I could chew this week, as even
TA David Robert said that my structure was "epically big" when he saw
it. `What?`, I asked? `I thought we were supposed to be making
something big.` Turns out I completely underestimated the amount of
time I would need to spend in the shop getting everything cut and
assembled - but all's well that ends well!
