---
layout: post
title:  "Week 3: Three-Axis Gyroscope Print and 3D Model Scanning"
image: week3/gyro-final.jpg
permalink: /week3/
---

# 3D Printing

The first part of today's assignment was to understand all about the
process and limitations of 3D printing. One of the most important
aspects is probably the structure of overhang and supports - in the
FDM (fused-deposition modeling) process that most of us have access
to, supports can only be built in the same material as being printed,
overhang angles are limited, and unsupported material can cross only
short gaps.

I soon realized that this made the prompt of

> design and 3D print an object that could not be made subtractively

a lot harder than it sounds, because what we're actually being asked
to do is make something that satisfies that, but also falls under the
necessary support constraints. So we can't just take any 3D body and
print it (unless using another process such as powder bed.) 

I looked around for some ideas by browsing the
[Thingverse](http://www.thingiverse.com/), at which point I saw a
picture of a gimballed gyroscope that looked like it could have been
printed as one piece. I immediately realized the print could be
relatively thin, but expand to a much more interesting
three-dimensional form. Because our assignment is to design the object
from scratch, I didn't look into any more of the details - making
mistakes is part of the fun!

Matt Carney provided an excellent [intermediate
tutorial](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cpVMr9dABus) on SolidWorks
this week, and explained his master modeling technique for properly
managing parametric relationships between different parts. This is an
incredibly useful workflow, and I took the first part of it as the
base for this assignment, which is to create sketches for all of the
main structural shapes first:

![gyro sketches](gyro-sketches.png)

At a high level, the gyroscope has three gimbals that are concentric
rings, with shafts that are 90 degrees offset for each inner
layer. The picture shows the print orientation, but if printed
correctly the gimbals should be able to rotate immediately out of the
printer. The tricky part here is to make sure the shafts are not
actually stuck to the rest of the structure, and are strong enough to
break any bonds with their enclosing holes. 

Rob Hart [found last
year](http://fab.cba.mit.edu/classes/863.13/people/robert.hart/Week4/RobertHartWeek4.html)
that a shaft clearance of `0.01 in` was sufficient for clearance
between straight edges. This turned out to be too small for circular
objects, as we'll see below.

An important part was the addition of fillets to the gyroscope
shafts. This served several purposes. First, the fillet helps support
the part of the shaft which is above empty space, as it is built up at
an angle. Second, it allows the shaft to self-center when it is being
rotated. Finally, it strengthens the shaft.

![gyro shaft fillet](gyro-shaft-fillet.png)

Below is a picture with layers from the initial print of this
gyroscope, computed from the 3D printing app. You can immediately see
that at the low resolution of `0.03` in, the shaft and the rest of the
structure look like they are going to be stuck together. This preview
is generally very helpful for diagnosing such issues.

![axis layers](axis-layer.png)

I went ahead and printed anyway, because at this point I didn't know
what wouldn't work. Here's what it looks like at around the same point
while printing. At this point you can see the shaft is pretty much
being fused to the frame.

![gyro print 1](gyro-print-1.jpg)

This is the final product. No amount of Exact-o knife trickery is
going to get that bearing to rotate.

![result](result-1.jpg)

At this point, I made a few changes to the model. First, I increased
the thickness of the shaft to strengthen it, as it would need to break
free of the hole. Second, I increased the clearance from `0.01 in` to
`0.02 in`. I also printed the model with supports, so that the bottom
of the shaft would not be completely attached to the hole, and
increased the printing resolution from `0.03 in` to `0.02 in`
vertically. This would help with making the shaft more round, as it is
built up in discrete layers. The increased resolution increased the
printing time from 35 to 50 minutes.

![bigger layers](maker_bigger_layers.png)

You can see the supports that are automatically added by the software
here, at the lowest layer before the shaft even starts to appear. This
will help the shaft to be suspended in the right place as it is
printing.

![shaft supports](shaft-supports.png)

During the printing process, the clearances look a lot better, and the
supports are helping the shaft stay in the right place.

![gyro print 2](gyro-print-2.jpg)

After breaking off the support structure, the gimbals can rotate right
out of the printer! The structure is pretty rigid, and can't be
disassembled into its separate bodies. It's a good example of
something that can't be done (very easily) subtractively.

![gyro after print](gyro-after-print.jpg)

Here's a comparison of the shafts for the first attempt and the second
one. The latter does its job, while the former is a complete mess of
fused plastic. Getting the tolerance right is important.

![gyro comparison](gyro-comparison.jpg)

For fun, I inserted an object with high rotational inertia into the
center of the gimbals, so it could fulfill its purpose as a
gyroscope. This isn't exactly a precision mechanical instrument,
though, and I wouldn't depend on it for navigation in any long sea
voyages.

![gyro final](gyro-final.jpg)

# 3D Scanning

For this part of the assignment, I'm going to go over a laborious
journey of turning a 3D scan into something that is actually usable
for CAD modeling.

We are using the Sense scanner, which uses a technology that stitches
together images of an object, taken at different angles, into a single
point or mesh cloud. All you have to do is wave it around. Sounds,
simple enough, right?

Well, there are some caveats. My first attempt was to scan a mug with
a handle. It turns out that this technology is not great for objects
with rotational symmetry, as there aren't enough features to identify
which angle the object is being scanned from. During the scan,
multiple handles started appearing on the mug at different angles, and
I abandoned this after a few tries.

I decided to scan a scale I found lying around in the shop instead,
which doesn't suffer this problem. The Sense scanning software offers
some basic functions to clean up the mesh from the scan, such as
trimming off unwanted portions and smoothing out local regions. It's
not too powerful, though, and we're going to have to do the brunt of
the work elsewhere.

![scan editing](scan-editing.png)

There are multiple file sizes that the scanner software outputs, and
as you can see, they vastly differ in size:

![file sizes](file_sizes.png)

## Mesh Cleanup

At this point I turned to SolidWorks for working with the mesh. Our
student edition includes the `ScanTo3D` toolbox which comes with
SolidWorks Premium, and has the features below. I know people have had
success with MeshLab and Rhino for working with 3D scans, but I
actually wanted to go to a CAD model that I could modify, and hence
took an experimental plunge into using SolidWorks' less-tested
tools. As of 2014, SolidWorks doesn't like opening big `.stl` files,
but is happy to work with `.obj` files.

The first step in SolidWorks is to clean up the mesh. Solidworks
doesn't actually recognize a mesh as a surface, which are parametric
regions that can be used for modeling. There are many steps to
actually get there. We start with the mesh prep tools, which first
allow us to align the mesh correctly with respect to the origin:

![mesh prep](meshprep.png)

Then, we trim off any extraneous parts of the mesh. It actually came
out pretty cleanly from the scanning software, so there isn't too much
to do here.

![mesh trim](mesh_trim.png)

The next step is a simplification phase, which reduces the number of
triangles by locally combining them. This makes the features coarser,
and you can do it both globally and locally.

![simplification](simplification.png)

Immediately after simplification, we are given the option to do
smoothing, which perturbs the orientation of triangles but not
actually geometrically modify them. This helps make apparent flat
regions actually flat instead of "bumpy". The scale surface above is
an example of smoothing that I did before in the scanning software.

The last step is to fill holes in the mesh, which SolidWorks seems to
be able to recognize and patch automatically.

![filling holes](fill_holes.png)

Now that the mesh is cleaned up, we can move on to one of two methods
for generating a surface that can be eventually turned into a solid
model.

## Automatic Surface Generation

The first option is for SolidWorks to generate local approximations to
the overall surface using parametric forms that are appropriately
trimmed, then knitted together. This is recommended for "organic"
objects that don't contain precise geometric shapes.

This process is extremely CPU intensive, and took a while even on my
desktop with a 4.4 GHz Core i7-4790K, and used a lot of RAM - even on
the low detail settings. It then produces a surface with
self-intersections and other errors.

![auto surfacing](surface_auto.png)

As you can see, the approximate surface is great if you are trying to
model a banana, but isn't too helpful for actually doing further
design.

After this, I tried closing the surface into a solid object by using
the edges at the bottom, but couldn't get it to do so agreeably. Seems
tantalizingly close, though.

![fill surface](fill_surface.png)

## Guided Surface Generation

The alternate method is to manually generate surfaces using parametric
representations, then to trim and knit them together. Starting from
the mesh again, the first step is a semi-manual painting where
surfaces are identified by different colors. You have to help
SolidWorks out here a bit. I'm using an option here to only work with
half of the mesh, as it is symmetric and can ostensibly be mirrored
later.

![identify faces](identify_faces.png)

Next, each of the identified faces has a surface generated from
it. Most of these are flat planes, but I also created some cylindrical
surfaces for the edge of the top plate, and the protrusion on the
rear.

![added surfaces](surfaces.png)

The next step is a pretty grueling process where all the intersecting
surfaces are used to trim each other using the `Trim Surface`
tool. This takes quite a while, as all intersecting surfaces need to
be used to trim each other. I also trimmed the bottom using a plane.

![trimming surfaces](trimming.png)

This is the final product, with most of the surfaces knitted
together. The trimming intersections create "watertight" joints, but
there are still some gaps due to the interesting geometry at the
front. The next step would be to thicken the surface from the space
contained by these surfaces and the two planes, and to mirror it
across the axis of symmetry. Once the solid is formed, we'd add
fillets to reclaim its original shape.

![cleaned surfaces](surfaces_cleaned.png)

In my opinion, that was a lot of work to get a model where the right
angles aren't perfect, the surfaces probably don't line up with the
axes, and the symmetry is a bit off. For objects like these, it's
probably best to design them from scratch using measurements and
sketching, rather than conversion from a 3D scan.

