---
layout: post
title:  "Weeks 11-12: AVR USB Devices and Drivers"
image: week11/finished-board.jpg
permalink: /week11/
---

One of the relatively unexplored topics in this week's lecture was
USB, the ubiquitous protocol that allows computers to communicate with
peripheral devices (containing microcontrollers). Creating a USB
device allows any computer to talk to it without the specialized
software and hardware we've been using so far. For these two weeks, I
decided to understand the requirements to create USB-compatible
devices and write the necessary software to talk to them.

## Hardware or Software USB?

Making a USB device requires programming a microcontroller that can
talk to a computer with the USB protocol. So far in the class, we've
been writing microcontroller code that communicates with various
protocols. It's also possible to do this with USB, and the
[V-USB][vusb] library implements this. However, having the
microcontroller emulate USB in **software** has several drawbacks,
including that it's slow, and that the microcontroller will need to
devote some amount of time to USB communication.

[vusb]: https://github.com/obdev/v-usb

On the other hand, microcontrollers with **hardware** USB support
offload the necessary computations to dedicated circuitry. In Atmel's
AVR line, Mega and XMega devices with the `U` suffix have hardware USB
support. In order to write microcontroller code to interact with the
USB hardware, there are helper libraries such as Atmel's
[USB stack][atmel-usb] and [LUFA][lufa]. I'll be exploring LUFA as
it's open source, is well documented, and has many examples.

[atmel-usb]: http://www.atmel.com/images/doc8360.pdf
[lufa]: http://www.atmel.com/images/doc8360.pdf

## Circuit Design

In the class inventory, we have a couple of devices with hardware USB
support: the **ATmega16U2** and the **ATXMEGA16A4U**. Because LUFA
support for the XMEGA AVRs is currently
[not well-supported][lufa-xmega], I've opted to go with the ATmega
chip.

[lufa-xmega]: http://www.fourwalledcubicle.com/files/LUFA/Doc/120219/html/_page__x_m_e_g_a_support.html

Given that we'll use the ATMega16U2, what's next? Well, it turns out
that there aren't many examples of USB device circuits for
microcontrollers floating around online. Even the datasheet isn't very
specific about examples of application circuits. Finally, after a long
search, I was happy to discover that the Arduino Uno revision 3 uses
an ATMega16U2 chip as a USB to serial converter for the actual
ATmega328p being programmed. [Its schematic][uno-r3] was very helpful
as an example to build a basic circuit.

[uno-r3]: http://arduino.cc/en/uploads/Main/Arduino_Uno_Rev3-schematic.pdf

From various datasheets and other examples, I have found several
things to be aware of when designing these circuits:

- In order to use Full-speed (12 Mbit/s) USB, the microcontroller
  needs to be able to generate a precize 48 MHz clock with a deviation
  of no more than 0.25%. Since resonators have 0.5% tolerance, This
  means only quartz crystals can be used, and moreover they need to
  evenly divide into this frequency in order for a
  [phase-locked loop][pll] to generate this clock. For the ATMega16U2,
  this will require a 8MHz or 16MHz crystal - no substitutes.
  
- Different quartz crystals at the same frequency are not
  interchangeable; they are specced at a fixed
  [load capacitance][load-cap] that must be matched by the circuit for
  the specified accuracy. If this capacitance is far off, the crystal
  can be slower or faster than intended.
  
- The USB signaling pins require resistors for
  [impedance matching][usb-impedance] to optimize signal quality. The
  datasheet shows some unspecified resistors here, and I discovered
  the reason by asking
  [this Electronics StackExchange question][ese-question].
  
[pll]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Phase-locked_loop
[load-cap]: https://www.adafruit.com/blog/2012/01/24/choosing-the-right-crystal-and-caps-for-your-design/
[usb-impedance]: http://www.usb.org/developers/usbfaq#sig6
[ese-question]: http://electronics.stackexchange.com/q/140081/57973

After the due diligence on the circuit engineering, we are finally
ready to design the schematic. Because I was using some non-standard
parts here, I found the [Ladyada][la-library] and
[Sparkfun][sf-library] Eagle libraries to be useful. In the circuit
below, I'm using a 16MHz crystal in a HC-49 surface mount package, an
ATmega32U2 - pin compatible with the ATmega16U2, and a USB A connector
directly on the PCB. 

The Eagle libraries also include **supply parts** which make it easier
to create `VCC` and `GND` connections by dropping parts instead of
naming nets. **I strongly recommend this as a workflow**! Note also
the impedance matching signaling resistors, and the capacitors paired
with the crystal, the values of which I borrowed from the Uno rev. 3
because of its similar configuration.

A power LED automatically lights up when the board is powered - a nice
feature to have. The RGB LED in the circuit is attached to hardware
PWM pins, so that it can be controlled with full color by setting the
corresponding PWM rates.

[la-library]: https://github.com/adafruit/Adafruit-Eagle-Library
[sf-library]: https://github.com/sparkfun/SparkFun-Eagle-Libraries

![](schematic.png)

The mega16U2 comes in a TQFP32 package, similar to the
mega328P. Compared with the pins on the tiny44 and tiny45, they are
much closer together and smaller. In order to mill traces for them,
one will either need to use a 10 mil end mill, or edit the pads to
allow for more space with them. Given the overall stress caused to the
class from 10 mil end mills, I decided to edit the pads to so that I
could mill the board with the normal 1/64" end mill. Note that this
makes the pads narrower than the pins, so soldering will be harder.

To change the pad size, you can just open the library in Eagle and use
the following menu. Here, I've changed the TQFP32 package's pads from
`0.16 x 0.05` to `0.14 x 0.06`.

![](change-smd.png)

This is the board, all laid out. My original design had many more LEDs
and switches, but it turned out I had bit off much more than I could
chew - or lay out on a single-sided board. I removed many of the extra
parts, and settled on three switches and one RGB LED. After many hours
of routing, I came up with this compact, symmetric design using the
integrated USB connector. It's a pity that the mega16U2 doesn't have
any ADC hardware, or I would have added several sensors to read later
via USB.

![](board.png)

Here's the result of milling the board. Note that there are some
traces pulling off in the center of the board, which is less than
ideal. However, nothing essential has been damaged, and hopefully some
solder will hold it all in place.

![](milling.jpg) 

Although I used 6 offset paths instead of the normal 4, there are
still copper traces around the edge of the board. This is a problem
around the USB connector, where we don't want to be shorting random
pins to each other. I shaved these copper parts off with an X-acto
knife.

I tested the board out in a USB socket and read the pin voltages, just
to make sure the connector will work:

![](usb-voltage.jpg)

Soldering really small packages to a board is incredibly difficult,
and one of the main reasons is the initial positioning of the IC. I
didn't want to use an initial solder joint to position the chip,
because this risked damaging the delicate traces and it is very hard
to position with tweezers in the first place. Nate Melenbrink
suggested putting tape down over half of the chip to position it. This
actually worked really well, because the length of the tape creates an
"arm" that makes it much easier to make small adjustments, and it can
be pressed down to hold the part in place.

![](masking-tape.jpg)

The traces on this chip are much too small to solder
individually. Just do them all in a row, and use the wick to soak up
any excess solder.

![](tinning.jpg)

At the same time, I've tinned the USB connection pins. This serves two
purposes. First, it protects the copper traces from oxidation, so that
the pins always make electrical contact. Second, it thickens up the
contacts a bit so that they mate more tightly with the USB socket.

Note that the schematic called for 22pF capacitors between the crystal
terminals and ground, and 22 Ohm resistors on the signaling pins. We
don't have those in the inventory, so I approximated by soldering two
10pF capacitors on top of each other for the crystal, and two 49.9 Ohm
resistors on top of each other for the signaling pins. The finished
board is below:

![](finished-board.jpg)

The power LED turns on when I plug it into the USB port, and there's
no smoke or heating. That's a good sign...

![](power-on.jpg)

The best sign that things are working is that the board shows up
immediately in the Windows Device Manager as a USB device called
`ATmega16u2 DFU`. 

> ![](usb-device.png)

Note that it hasn't even been programmed yet!  However, this is
because all AVR chips with hardware USB come with a DFU (Device
Firmware Updater) bootloader that allows them to be programmed
directly from the USB port without needing an ISP or other
programmer. The DFU bootloader presents itself as a USB device that
can be recognized by a computer.

This means that the microcontroller is able to talk to the computer
and identify itself, and moreover we are in a good position to write
drivers for next week's assignment.

The DFU bootloader seems rather convenient for uploading code without
needing an ISP. There's even an [open source project][dfu-programmer]
for doing this, which takes the place of avrdude. I will definitely be
checking this out for next week.

[dfu-programmer]: https://github.com/dfu-programmer/dfu-programmer
