---
layout: post
title:  "Week 6: Molding and Casting...Chocolate!"
image: week6/choc-reverse.jpg
permalink: /week6/
---

For molding and casting week, I decided to try working with
chocolate. The first order of business was to pay a visit to [Reynolds
Advanced Materials](http://www.reynoldsam.com/) to get some food safe
silicone. They have some really cool stuff here, and are a good
inspiration for interesting mold ideas.

![Reynolds Advanced Materials](reynolds.jpg)

Room temperature vulcanization (RTV) silicone, which we're using to
make flexible molds, is cured with two different reactions: tin cure
and platinum cure. All of the food-safe stuff falls under the platinum
cure category. We're provided with OOMOO and Mold Max 60, which are
both tin cure silicones. Compared to tin cure, the platinum cure
silicones

- Are more expensive (probably because platinum costs upwards of $1,000 / ounce)
- Generally take longer to cure
- May be tricker to cure due to environmental conditions inhibiting the platinum catalyst
- Exhibit almost no shrinkage during curing (tin cure releases some alcohols)
- Last longer once cured, and don't degrade over the long term
- Can be used in skin-safe and food-safe applications

![Platinum Cure Silicone](plat-silicone.jpg)

In practice, the platinum cure silicone we can buy is generally
thicker to pour than the low-viscosity introductory stuff that is
given in class, so it is more prone to bubble formation; the
instructions recommend vacuum degassing. It also requires careful
weighing by weight instead of volume, and requires a high temperature
post-cure to attain optimal properties (and be safe for food). All of
these features make it trickier to use.

I ended up choosing Sorta-Clear 40 for its relatively long pot life,
and because of the cool factor of transparency. Other options that are
also food-safe are Smooth-Sil 940 (which is opaque) and the Equinox
silicone putties. It cost $38.20 for 1 kg.

![Sorta-Clear 40](sorta-clear.jpg)

Because of the increased difficulty in using this silicone, and
because of the temperamental nature of chocolate itself (more on that
later), I decided to go with a one-part mold to keep things simple and
avoid shooting myself in the foot. I designed a heart shape using
lofted surfaces in SolidWorks and rotated and patterned it to create
several positives over approximately 2.5 by 5.5 inches.

![Mold Design](design.png)

This file was exported as in the `.stl` format and opened in
PartWorks3D, which is the ShopBot equivalent of the fab modules for
the Modela. It allows us to specify the depth and position of the cut,
and generate toolpaths. Here you see the area to be cut in the outline
of a block of wax.

![Toolpath](cutout.png)

We generate several 2.5D toolpaths to cut this part. First is a
roughing toolpath in the xy plane, which removes most of the
material. Then, there is a finishing toolpath in the xz and yz planes,
which move vertically over the contours of the part. You can see the
computed finishing toolpath in this picture, where the tip of the end
mill is offset from the surface of the heart that we're cutting.

![Finishing Toolpath](finish-toolpath.png)

This is what the completed rough cut looks like. It's basically made
some very coarse passes to remove materials at different depths. Using
a 1/8" bit with a 50% stepover, this took about 11 minutes.

![Rough Cut](rough-cut.jpg)

This is the completed finish cut. Also using a 1/8" bit, but with a
12.5% stepover and two passes that ran orthogonally to each other, it
took about 35 minutes to complete.

![Finish Cut](finish-cut.jpg)

Now, it's time to move on to the messy part. The Sorta-Clear 40 that
we're using requires two parts (A,B) to be mixed 10A:1B by weight. The
A part is very viscous, and creates a lot of bubbles when being poured
or mixed. Hence, we mixed an appropriate amount in a large tub and
placed it in the degassing chamber. Turning on the vacuum causes the
mass to start bubbling, foaming, and growing:

![Degassing Start](degas-start.jpg)

At this point, the foam has expanded and is about to spill out over
the edge of the container. We left room for almost three times the
expansion, but even that wasn't enough. It seems like 4-5 times extra
volume is the right amount.

Anyway, at this point you don't want to turn the vacuum off. Grit your
teeth and keep it running...

![Degassing Middle](degas-middle.jpg)

...because suddenly, when you reach 28 inches of mercury in the
vacuum, the entire froth collapses as most of the bubbles pop. Just
run it for about a minute more at this point, and take it out. 

![Degassing End](degas-end.jpg)

Pouring this stuff was tricky, as it is significantly thicker than the
other silicones we work with. It comes out like molasses and folds
over itself as you pour, forming bubbles at the surface of the mold. I
don't think pouring in a thin stream really applies here, as it has
enough surface tension to maintain bubbles even in a thin stream, and
the stream itself can fold over to cause more bubbles. I ended up
improvising as best I could.

![Pouring](pouring.jpg)

This is what it looks like after the pour. Several bubbles have formed
and are rising to the surface, but I poked them with a sharp metal
implement, which caused the surface to settle smoothly in short order.

![Cured](cured.jpg)

The curing process for this silicone is significantly longer than the
tin cure alternatives, taking 16 hours at room temperature. Luckily,
it only takes 3 hours at 125 degrees, so we popped it in the toaster
oven to speed things up.

![Demold](demold.jpg)

Despite all the concern about bubbles, our degassing and
bubble-popping efforts seem to have paid off. The molds have come out
very clear with almost no bubbles to be seen. They are also
transparent, which is an awesome feature. The mold in the background
belongs to [Tout
Wang](http://fab.cba.mit.edu/classes/863.14/people/tout_wang), who is
going to try casting his face in chocolate coins.

One final step that we have to do here is to post-cure the molds at
212 degrees for an hour. This is supposed to ensure that everything's
ready to go and food safe.

Time for chocolate now! We've moved in to my kitchen at home. This is
probably the hardest part, due to the insane difficulty of tempering
chocolate correctly. Tout and I have set up a station with our molds
and a double boiler to slowly melt the chocolate to an appropriate
temperature. We're using 72% Belgian dark chocolate, which contains
nothing other than cocoa butter, cocoa solids, sugar, and a bit of
lecithin. Any chocolate with other additives (such as vegetable oil)
can't be tempered in the traditional way.

![Starting Chocolate](choc-start.jpg)

Tempering chocolate basically involves making sure the cocoa butter
hardens into a specific crystalline structure with crystals that form
only at a specific temperature. To make this happen, we have to hold
the chocolate at a fixed temperature for a while, and either cause
these crystals to form or introduce them in some other way. I'm going
to be using the latter method, which is called seeding, but for a
great discussion of this topic you should check out [this Cooking for
Engineers
article](http://www.cookingforengineers.com/article/155/Tempering-Chocolate).

The first step in this process is to take about two-thirds of the
chocolate to be used and melt it above the temperature of all possible
cocoa butter crystals, being careful not to burn it. I've taken the
top 'pan' of the double boiler, actually a thick stoneware bowl, off
the heat source at this point, and am using my trusty infrared
thermometer to monitor the temperature of the chocolate. The bowl has
a high heat capacity and helps to guard against any sudden temperature
changes as we try to maintain the chocolate at a specific temperature.

![Melting Chocolate](melting.jpg)

Next, we slowly stir in the rest of the chocolate until the whole
mixture reaches the tempering temperature for dark chocolate, 88 to 90
degrees. We then stir the chocolate while maintaining it at this
temperature by alternately adding heat and taking it off the heat. The
stirring uses the existing solid chocolate pieces to propagate the
formation of the desirable type of cocoa butter crystals.

![Tempering Chocolate](tempering.jpg)

After a while, we can pour the chocolate into our molds. It's pretty
hard to obtain an even surface on the back with a one part mold.

![Molding Chocolate](choc-mold.jpg)

The transparency of these clear molds is very cool! We can actually
see the chocolate hearts from the other side of the mold. It's not
clear from the picture, but the hearts have actually picked up every
detail of the tool path from the mold.

![Reverse of Chocolate Mold](choc-reverse.jpg)

I'm glad we did this entire process as a pair. While one of us is
smoothing out our chocolate casting, the other has to keep a watchful
eye on the pot, let the chocolate become too hot and lose its
temper. One person would probably need some extreme multitasking
skills to be able to accomplish this alone.

![Multitasking](multitask.jpg)

Finally, I'm finished with two sets of chocolate hearts cast from my
mold. Some of them have ends broken off where the edge was attached to
a thick coating. I'll have to be more careful next time. Hope some of
my classmates enjoy eating them this week.

![Finished Hearts](hearts.jpg)

At this point, you may ask why we went to all the trouble of tempering
the chocolate, with a thermometer and everything. Well, toward the end
of the process, we let the bowl get too hot and the remaining
chocolate lost its temper. The pieces on the left show what it looks
like when these harden. Because the cocoa butter crystals are in a
less stable form, they "bloom" or come to the surface of the
chocolate, resulting in unsightly and unappetizing patterns. To
reiterate - that's not white chocolate on the left - it's the same
chocolate as the correctly tempered chocolate on the right. Untempered
chocolate melts at the touch of a finger, has an uneven surface, and
crumbles instead of snapping when broken.

![Importance of Tempering](tempered.jpg)

What have I learned this week? Well, chocolate making is probably best
left to the professionals. It's probably too tricky and time-consuming
to be worth doing at home!
